This is texinfo, produced by makeinfo version 4.2 from texinfo.txi.

This manual is for GNU Texinfo (version 4.2, 28 March 2002), a
documentation system that can produce both online information and a
printed manual from a single source.

  Copyright (C) 1988, 90, 91, 92, 93, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99, 2000, 01, 02
Free Software Foundation, Inc.

     Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this
     document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License,
     Version 1.1 or any later version published by the Free Software
     Foundation; with no Invariant Sections, with the Front-Cover texts
     being "A GNU Manual," and with the Back-Cover Texts as in (a)
     below.  A copy of the license is included in the section entitled
     "GNU Free Documentation License."

     (a) The FSF's Back-Cover Text is: "You have freedom to copy and
     modify this GNU Manual, like GNU software.  Copies published by
     the Free Software Foundation raise funds for GNU development."
  
INFO-DIR-SECTION Texinfo documentation system
START-INFO-DIR-ENTRY
* Texinfo: (texinfo).           The GNU documentation format.
* install-info: (texinfo)Invoking install-info. Update info/dir entries.
* texi2dvi: (texinfo)Format with texi2dvi.      Print Texinfo documents.
* texindex: (texinfo)Format with tex/texindex.  Sort Texinfo index files.
* makeinfo: (texinfo)Invoking makeinfo.         Translate Texinfo source.
END-INFO-DIR-ENTRY


File: texinfo,  Node: setfilename,  Next: settitle,  Prev: Start of Header,  Up: Texinfo File Header

`@setfilename': Set the output file name
----------------------------------------

  In order to serve as the primary input file for either `makeinfo' or
TeX, a Texinfo file must contain a line that looks like this:

     @setfilename INFO-FILE-NAME

  Write the `@setfilename' command at the beginning of a line and
follow it on the same line by the Info file name.  Do not write anything
else on the line; anything on the line after the command is considered
part of the file name, including what would otherwise be a comment.

  The Info formatting commands ignore everything written before the
`@setfilename' line, which is why the very first line of the file (the
`\input' line) does not show up in the output.

  The `@setfilename' line specifies the name of the output file to be
generated.  This name must be different from the name of the Texinfo
file.  There are two conventions for choosing the name: you can either
remove the extension (such as `.texi') entirely from the input file
name, or, preferably, replace it with the `.info' extension.

  Although an explicit `.info' extension is preferable, some operating
systems cannot handle long file names.  You can run into a problem even
when the file name you specify is itself short enough.  This occurs
because the Info formatters split a long Info file into short indirect
subfiles, and name them by appending `-1', `-2', ..., `-10', `-11', and
so on, to the original file name.  (*Note Tag and Split Files::.)  The
subfile name `texinfo.info-10', for example, is too long for old
systems with a 14-character limit on filenames; so the Info file name
for this document is `texinfo' rather than `texinfo.info'.  When
`makeinfo' is running on operating systems such as MS-DOS which impose
severe limits on file names, it may remove some characters from the
original file name to leave enough space for the subfile suffix, thus
producing files named `texin-10', `gcc.i12', etc.

  When producing HTML output, `makeinfo' will replace any extension
with `html', or add `.html' if the given name has no extension.

  The `@setfilename' line produces no output when you typeset a manual
with TeX, but it is nevertheless essential: it opens the index,
cross-reference, and other auxiliary files used by Texinfo, and also
reads `texinfo.cnf' if that file is present on your system (*note
Preparing for TeX: Preparing for TeX.).


File: texinfo,  Node: settitle,  Next: End of Header,  Prev: setfilename,  Up: Texinfo File Header

`@settitle': Set the document title
-----------------------------------

  In order to be made into a printed manual, a Texinfo file must contain
a line that looks like this:

     @settitle TITLE

  Write the `@settitle' command at the beginning of a line and follow
it on the same line by the title.  This tells TeX the title to use in a
header or footer.  Do not write anything else on the line; anything on
the line after the command is considered part of the title, including
what would otherwise be a comment.

  The `@settitle' command should precede everything that generates
actual output in TeX.

  In the HTML file produced by `makeinfo', TITLE also serves as the
document `<title>' and the default document description in the `<head>'
part; see *Note documentdescription::, for how to change that.

  The title in the `@settitle' command does not affect the title as it
appears on the title page.  Thus, the two do not need not match
exactly.  A practice we recommend is to include the version or edition
number of the manual in the `@settitle' title; on the title page, the
version number generally appears as a `@subtitle' so it would be
omitted from the `@title'.  (*Note titlepage::.)

  Conventionally, when TeX formats a Texinfo file for double-sided
output, the title is printed in the left-hand (even-numbered) page
headings and the current chapter title is printed in the right-hand
(odd-numbered) page headings.  (TeX learns the title of each chapter
from each `@chapter' command.)  By default, no page footer is printed.

  Even if you are printing in a single-sided style, TeX looks for an
`@settitle' command line, in case you include the manual title in the
heading.

  TeX prints page headings only for that text that comes after the
`@end titlepage' command in the Texinfo file, or that comes after an
`@headings' command that turns on headings.  (*Note The `@headings'
Command: headings on off, for more information.)

  You may, if you wish, create your own, customized headings and
footings.  *Note Headings::, for a detailed discussion of this.


File: texinfo,  Node: End of Header,  Prev: settitle,  Up: Texinfo File Header

End of Header
-------------

  Follow the header lines with an end-of-header line, which is a
Texinfo comment that looks like this:

     @c %**end of header

  *Note Start of Header::.


File: texinfo,  Node: Document Permissions,  Next: Titlepage & Copyright Page,  Prev: Texinfo File Header,  Up: Beginning a File

Document Permissions
====================

  The copyright notice and copying permissions for a document need to
appear in several places in the various Texinfo output formats.
Therefore, Texinfo provides a command (`@copying') to declare this text
once, and another command (`@insertcopying') to insert the text at
appropriate points.

* Menu:

* copying::                 Declare the document's copying permissions.
* insertcopying::           Where to insert the permissions.


File: texinfo,  Node: copying,  Next: insertcopying,  Up: Document Permissions

`@copying': Declare copying permissions
---------------------------------------

  The `@copying' command should be given very early in the document;
right after the header material (*note Texinfo File Header::) is the
recommended location.  It conventionally consists of a sentence or two
about what the program is, the legal copyright line, and the copying
permissions.  Here is a skeletal example:

     @copying
     This manual is for PROGRAM (version VERSION),
     which ...
     
     Copyright @copyright{} YEARS COPYRIGHT-OWNER.
     
     @quotation
     Permission is granted to ...
     @end quotation
     @end copying

  The `@quotation' has no legal significance; it's there to improve
readability in some contexts.

  *Note GNU Sample Texts::, for the full text to be used in GNU manuals.
*Note GNU Free Documentation License::, for the license itself under
which GNU and other free manuals are distributed.

  The text of `@copying' is output as a comment at the beginning of
Info, HTML, and XML output files.  It is _not_ output implicitly in
plain text or TeX; it's up to you to use `@insertcopying' to emit the
copying information.  See the next section for details.

  In output formats that support it (print and HTML), the
`@copyright{}' command generates a `c' inside a circle.  In Info and
plain text, it generates `(C)'.  The copyright notice itself has the
following legally defined sequence:

     Copyright (C) YEARS COPYRIGHT-OWNER.

  The word `Copyright' must always be written in English, even if the
manual is otherwise in another language.  This is due to international
law.

  The list of years should include all years in which a version was
completed (even if it was released in a subsequent year).  Ranges are
not allowed, each year must be written out individually, separated by
commas.

  The copyright owner (or owners) is whoever holds legal copyright on
the work.  In the case of works assigned to the FSF, the owner is `Free
Software Foundation, Inc.'.

  *Note Copyright Notices: (maintain)Copyright Notices, for additional
information.


File: texinfo,  Node: insertcopying,  Prev: copying,  Up: Document Permissions

`@insertcopying': Include permissions text
------------------------------------------

  The `@insertcopying' command is simply written on a line by itself,
like this:

     @insertcopying

  It inserts the text previously defined by `@copying'.  Legally, it
must be used on the copyright page in the printed manual (*note
Copyright::).

  Although it's not a legal requirement, we also strongly recommend
using `@insertcopying' in the Top node of your manual (*note The Top
Node::).  Here's why:

  The `@copying' command itself causes the permissions text to appear
in an Info file _before_ the first node.  The text is also copied into
the beginning of each split Info output file, as is legally necessary.
This location implies a human reading the manual using Info does _not_
see this text (except when using the advanced Info command `g *').
Therefore, an explicit `@insertcopying' in the Top node makes it
apparent to readers that the manual is free.

  Similarly, the `@copying' text is automatically included at the
beginning of each HTML output file, as an HTML comment.  Again, this
text is not visible (unless the reader views the HTML source).  And
therefore again, the `@insertcopying' in the Top node is valuable
because it makes the copying permissions visible and thus promotes
freedom.

  The permissions text defined by `@copying' also appears automatically
at the beginning of the XML output file.


File: texinfo,  Node: Titlepage & Copyright Page,  Next: The Top Node,  Prev: Document Permissions,  Up: Beginning a File

Title and Copyright Pages
=========================

  In hard copy output, the manual's name and author are usually printed
on a title page.  Copyright information is usually printed on the back
of the title page.

  The title and copyright pages appear in the printed manual, but not in
the Info file.  Because of this, it is possible to use several slightly
obscure TeX typesetting commands that cannot be used in an Info file.
In addition, this part of the beginning of a Texinfo file contains the
text of the copying permissions that appears in the printed manual.

  You may wish to include titlepage-like information for plain text
output.  Simply place any such leading material between `@ifplaintext'
and `@end ifplaintext'; `makeinfo' includes this when writing plain
text (`--no-headers'), along with an `@insertcopying'.

* Menu:

* titlepage::                   Create a title for the printed document.
* titlefont center sp::         The `@titlefont', `@center',
                                  and `@sp' commands.
* title subtitle author::       The `@title', `@subtitle',
                                  and `@author' commands.
* Copyright::                   How to write the copyright notice and
                                  include copying permissions.
* end titlepage::               Turn on page headings after the title and
                                  copyright pages.
* headings on off::             An option for turning headings on and off
                                  and double or single sided printing.


File: texinfo,  Node: titlepage,  Next: titlefont center sp,  Up: Titlepage & Copyright Page

`@titlepage'
------------

  Start the material for the title page and following copyright page
with `@titlepage' on a line by itself and end it with `@end titlepage'
on a line by itself.

  The `@end titlepage' command starts a new page and turns on page
numbering.  (*Note Page Headings: Headings, for details about how to
generate page headings.)  All the material that you want to appear on
unnumbered pages should be put between the `@titlepage' and `@end
titlepage' commands.  You can force the table of contents to appear
there with the `@setcontentsaftertitlepage' command (*note Contents::).

  By using the `@page' command you can force a page break within the
region delineated by the `@titlepage' and `@end titlepage' commands and
thereby create more than one unnumbered page.  This is how the
copyright page is produced.  (The `@titlepage' command might perhaps
have been better named the `@titleandadditionalpages' command, but that
would have been rather long!)

  When you write a manual about a computer program, you should write the
version of the program to which the manual applies on the title page.
If the manual changes more frequently than the program or is independent
of it, you should also include an edition number(1) (*note
titlepage-Footnote-1::) for the manual.  This helps readers keep track
of which manual is for which version of the program.  (The `Top' node
should also contain this information; see *Note The Top Node::.)

  Texinfo provides two main methods for creating a title page.  One
method uses the `@titlefont', `@sp', and `@center' commands to generate
a title page in which the words on the page are centered.

  The second method uses the `@title', `@subtitle', and `@author'
commands to create a title page with black rules under the title and
author lines and the subtitle text set flush to the right hand side of
the page.  With this method, you do not specify any of the actual
formatting of the title page.  You specify the text you want, and
Texinfo does the formatting.

  You may use either method, or you may combine them; see the examples
in the sections below.

  For extremely simple applications, and for the bastard title page in
traditional book front matter, Texinfo also provides a command
`@shorttitlepage' which takes the rest of the line as the title.  The
argument is typeset on a page by itself and followed by a blank page.


File: texinfo,  Node: titlepage-Footnotes,  Up: titlepage

  (1) We have found that it is helpful to refer to versions of
independent manuals as `editions' and versions of programs as
`versions'; otherwise, we find we are liable to confuse each other in
conversation by referring to both the documentation and the software
with the same words.


File: texinfo,  Node: titlefont center sp,  Next: title subtitle author,  Prev: titlepage,  Up: Titlepage & Copyright Page

`@titlefont', `@center', and `@sp'
----------------------------------

  You can use the `@titlefont', `@sp', and `@center' commands to create
a title page for a printed document.  (This is the first of the two
methods for creating a title page in Texinfo.)

  Use the `@titlefont' command to select a large font suitable for the
title itself.  You can use `@titlefont' more than once if you have an
especially long title.

  For example:

     @titlefont{Texinfo}

  Use the `@center' command at the beginning of a line to center the
remaining text on that line.  Thus,

     @center @titlefont{Texinfo}

centers the title, which in this example is "Texinfo" printed in the
title font.

  Use the `@sp' command to insert vertical space.  For example:

     @sp 2

This inserts two blank lines on the printed page.  (*Note `@sp': sp,
for more information about the `@sp' command.)

  A template for this method looks like this:

     @titlepage
     @sp 10
     @center @titlefont{NAME-OF-MANUAL-WHEN-PRINTED}
     @sp 2
     @center SUBTITLE-IF-ANY
     @sp 2
     @center AUTHOR
     ...
     @end titlepage

  The spacing of the example fits an 8.5 by 11 inch manual.


File: texinfo,  Node: title subtitle author,  Next: Copyright,  Prev: titlefont center sp,  Up: Titlepage & Copyright Page

`@title', `@subtitle', and `@author'
------------------------------------

  You can use the `@title', `@subtitle', and `@author' commands to
create a title page in which the vertical and horizontal spacing is
done for you automatically.  This contrasts with the method described
in the previous section, in which the `@sp' command is needed to adjust
vertical spacing.

  Write the `@title', `@subtitle', or `@author' commands at the
beginning of a line followed by the title, subtitle, or author.

  The `@title' command produces a line in which the title is set flush
to the left-hand side of the page in a larger than normal font.  The
title is underlined with a black rule.  Only a single line is allowed;
the `@*' command may not be used to break the title into two lines.  To
handle very long titles, you may find it profitable to use both
`@title' and `@titlefont'; see the final example in this section.

  The `@subtitle' command sets subtitles in a normal-sized font flush
to the right-hand side of the page.

  The `@author' command sets the names of the author or authors in a
middle-sized font flush to the left-hand side of the page on a line
near the bottom of the title page.  The names are underlined with a
black rule that is thinner than the rule that underlines the title.
(The black rule only occurs if the `@author' command line is followed
by an `@page' command line.)

  There are two ways to use the `@author' command: you can write the
name or names on the remaining part of the line that starts with an
`@author' command:

     @author by Jane Smith and John Doe

or you can write the names one above each other by using two (or more)
`@author' commands:

     @author Jane Smith
     @author John Doe

(Only the bottom name is underlined with a black rule.)

  A template for this method looks like this:

     @titlepage
     @title NAME-OF-MANUAL-WHEN-PRINTED
     @subtitle SUBTITLE-IF-ANY
     @subtitle SECOND-SUBTITLE
     @author AUTHOR
     @page
     ...
     @end titlepage

  You may also combine the `@titlefont' method described in the
previous section and `@title' method described in this one.  This may
be useful if you have a very long title.  Here is a real-life example:

     @titlepage
     @titlefont{GNU Software}
     @sp 1
     @title for MS-Windows and MS-DOS
     @subtitle Edition @value{e} for Release @value{cde}
     @author by Daniel Hagerty, Melissa Weisshaus
     @author and Eli Zaretskii

(The use of `@value' here is explained in *Note value Example::.


File: texinfo,  Node: Copyright,  Next: end titlepage,  Prev: title subtitle author,  Up: Titlepage & Copyright Page

Copyright Page
--------------

  By international treaty, the copyright notice for a book must be
either on the title page or on the back of the title page.  When the
copyright notice is on the back of the title page, that page is
customarily not numbered.  Therefore, in Texinfo, the information on
the copyright page should be within `@titlepage' and `@end titlepage'
commands.

  Use the `@page' command to cause a page break.  To push the copyright
notice and the other text on the copyright page towards the bottom of
the page, use the following incantantion after `@page':

     @vskip 0pt plus 1filll

This is a TeX command that is not supported by the Info formatting
commands.  The `@vskip' command inserts whitespace.  The `0pt plus
1filll' means to put in zero points of mandatory whitespace, and as
much optional whitespace as needed to push the following text to the
bottom of the page.  Note the use of three `l's in the word `filll';
this is correct.

  To insert the copyright text itself, write `@insertcopying' next
(*note Document Permissions::):

     @insertcopying

  Follow the copying text by the publisher, ISBN numbers, cover art
credits, and other such information.

  Here is an example putting all this together:

     @titlepage
     ...
     @page
     @vskip 0pt plus 1filll
     @insertcopying
     
     Published by ...
     
     Cover art by ...
     @end titlepage


File: texinfo,  Node: end titlepage,  Next: headings on off,  Prev: Copyright,  Up: Titlepage & Copyright Page

Heading Generation
------------------

  The `@end titlepage' command must be written on a line by itself.  It
not only marks the end of the title and copyright pages, but also
causes TeX to start generating page headings and page numbers.

  To repeat what is said elsewhere,  Texinfo has two standard page
heading formats, one for documents which are printed on one side of
each sheet of paper (single-sided printing), and the other for
documents which are printed on both sides of each sheet (double-sided
printing).  You can specify these formats in different ways:

   * The conventional way is to write an `@setchapternewpage' command
     before the title page commands, and then have the `@end titlepage'
     command start generating page headings in the manner desired.
     (*Note setchapternewpage::.)

   * Alternatively, you can use the `@headings' command to prevent page
     headings from being generated or to start them for either single or
     double-sided printing.  (Write an `@headings' command immediately
     after the `@end titlepage' command.  *Note The `@headings'
     Command: headings on off, for more information.)

   * Or, you may specify your own page heading and footing format.
     *Note Page Headings: Headings, for detailed information about page
     headings and footings.

  Most documents are formatted with the standard single-sided or
double-sided format, using `@setchapternewpage odd' for double-sided
printing and no `@setchapternewpage' command for single-sided printing.


File: texinfo,  Node: headings on off,  Prev: end titlepage,  Up: Titlepage & Copyright Page

The `@headings' Command
-----------------------

  The `@headings' command is rarely used.  It specifies what kind of
page headings and footings to print on each page.  Usually, this is
controlled by the `@setchapternewpage' command.  You need the
`@headings' command only if the `@setchapternewpage' command does not
do what you want, or if you want to turn off pre-defined page headings
prior to defining your own.  Write an `@headings' command immediately
after the `@end titlepage' command.

  You can use `@headings' as follows:

`@headings off'
     Turn off printing of page headings.

`@headings single'
     Turn on page headings appropriate for single-sided printing.

`@headings double'
`@headings on'
     Turn on page headings appropriate for double-sided printing.  The
     two commands, `@headings on' and `@headings double', are
     synonymous.

`@headings singleafter'
`@headings doubleafter'
     Turn on `single' or `double' headings, respectively, after the
     current page is output.

`@headings on'
     Turn on page headings: `single' if `@setchapternewpage on',
     `double' otherwise.

  For example, suppose you write `@setchapternewpage off' before the
`@titlepage' command to tell TeX to start a new chapter on the same
page as the end of the last chapter.  This command also causes TeX to
typeset page headers for single-sided printing.  To cause TeX to
typeset for double sided printing, write `@headings double' after the
`@end titlepage' command.

  You can stop TeX from generating any page headings at all by writing
`@headings off' on a line of its own immediately after the line
containing the `@end titlepage' command, like this:

     @end titlepage
     @headings off

The `@headings off' command overrides the `@end titlepage' command,
which would otherwise cause TeX to print page headings.

  You can also specify your own style of page heading and footing.
*Note Page Headings: Headings, for more information.


File: texinfo,  Node: The Top Node,  Next: Global Document Commands,  Prev: Titlepage & Copyright Page,  Up: Beginning a File

The `Top' Node and Master Menu
==============================

  The `Top' node is the node in which a reader enters an Info manual.
As such, it should begin with the `@insertcopying' command (*note
Document Permissions::) to provide a brief description of the manual
(including the version number) and copying permissions, and end with a
master menu for the whole manual.  Of course you should include any
other general information you feel a reader would find helpful.

  It is also conventional to write an `@top' sectioning command line
containing the title of the document immediately after the `@node Top'
line (*note The `@top' Sectioning Command: makeinfo top command.).

  The contents of the `Top' node should appear only in the online
output; none of it should appear in printed output, so enclose it
between `@ifnottex' and `@end ifnottex' commands.  (TeX does not print
either an `@node' line or a menu; they appear only in Info; strictly
speaking, you are not required to enclose these parts between
`@ifnottex' and `@end ifnottext', but it is simplest to do so.  *Note
Conditionally Visible Text: Conditionals.)

* Menu:

* Top Node Example::
* Master Menu Parts::


File: texinfo,  Node: Top Node Example,  Next: Master Menu Parts,  Up: The Top Node

Top Node Example
----------------

  Here is an example of a Top node.

     @ifnottex
     @node Top
     @top Sample Title
     
     @insertcopying
     
     Additional general information.
     
     @menu
     * First Chapter::
     * Second Chapter::
     ...
     * Index::
     @end menu


File: texinfo,  Node: Master Menu Parts,  Prev: Top Node Example,  Up: The Top Node

Parts of a Master Menu
----------------------

  A "master menu" is a detailed main menu listing all the nodes in a
file.

  A master menu is enclosed in `@menu' and `@end menu' commands and
does not appear in the printed document.

  Generally, a master menu is divided into parts.

   * The first part contains the major nodes in the Texinfo file: the
     nodes for the chapters, chapter-like sections, and the appendices.

   * The second part contains nodes for the indices.

   * The third and subsequent parts contain a listing of the other,
     lower level nodes, often ordered by chapter.  This way, rather
     than go through an intermediary menu, an inquirer can go directly
     to a particular node when searching for specific information.
     These menu items are not required; add them if you think they are a
     convenience.  If you do use them, put `@detailmenu' before the
     first one, and `@end detailmenu' after the last; otherwise,
     `makeinfo' will get confused.

  Each section in the menu can be introduced by a descriptive line.  So
long as the line does not begin with an asterisk, it will not be
treated as a menu entry.  (*Note Writing a Menu::, for more
information.)

  For example, the master menu for this manual looks like the following
(but has many more entries):

     @menu
     * Copying Conditions::  Your rights.
     * Overview::            Texinfo in brief.
     ...
     * Command and Variable Index::
     * Concept Index::
     
     @detailmenu
      --- The Detailed Node Listing ---
     
     Overview of Texinfo
     
     * Reporting Bugs:: ...
     ...
     
     Beginning a Texinfo File
     
     * Sample Beginning:: ...
     ...
     @end detailmenu
     @end menu


File: texinfo,  Node: Global Document Commands,  Next: Software Copying Permissions,  Prev: The Top Node,  Up: Beginning a File

Global Document Commands
========================

  Besides the basic commands mentioned in the previous sections, here
are additional commands which affect the document as a whole.  They are
generally all given before the Top node, if they are given at all.

* Menu:

* documentdescription::         Document summary for the HTML output.
* setchapternewpage::           Start chapters on right-hand pages.
* paragraphindent::             Specify paragraph indentation.
* exampleindent::               Specify environment indentation.


File: texinfo,  Node: documentdescription,  Next: setchapternewpage,  Up: Global Document Commands

`@documentdescription': Summary text
------------------------------------

  When producing HTML output for a document, `makeinfo' writes a
`<meta>' element in the `<head>' to give some idea of the content of
the document.  By default, this "description" is the title of the
document, taken from the `@settitle' command (*note settitle::).  To
change this, use the `@documentdescription' environment, as in:

     @documentdescription
     descriptive text.
     @end documentdescription

This will produce the following output in the `<head>' of the HTML:

     <meta name=description content="descriptive text.">

  `@documentdescription' must be specified before the first node of the
document.


File: texinfo,  Node: setchapternewpage,  Next: paragraphindent,  Prev: documentdescription,  Up: Global Document Commands

`@setchapternewpage':
---------------------

  In an officially bound book, text is usually printed on both sides of
the paper, chapters start on right-hand pages, and right-hand pages have
odd numbers.  But in short reports, text often is printed only on one
side of the paper.  Also in short reports, chapters sometimes do not
start on new pages, but are printed on the same page as the end of the
preceding chapter, after a small amount of vertical whitespace.

  You can use the `@setchapternewpage' command with various arguments
to specify how TeX should start chapters and whether it should format
headers for printing on one or both sides of the paper (single-sided or
double-sided printing).

  Write the `@setchapternewpage' command at the beginning of a line
followed by its argument.

  For example, you would write the following to cause each chapter to
start on a fresh odd-numbered page:

     @setchapternewpage odd

  You can specify one of three alternatives with the
`@setchapternewpage' command:

`@setchapternewpage off'
     Cause TeX to typeset a new chapter on the same page as the last
     chapter, after skipping some vertical whitespace.  Also, cause TeX
     to format page headers for single-sided printing.

`@setchapternewpage on'
     Cause TeX to start new chapters on new pages and to format page
     headers for single-sided printing.  This is the form most often
     used for short reports or personal printing. This is the default.

`@setchapternewpage odd'
     Cause TeX to start new chapters on new, odd-numbered pages
     (right-handed pages) and to typeset for double-sided printing.
     This is the form most often used for books and manuals.

  Texinfo does not have an `@setchapternewpage even' command, because
there is no printing tradition of starting chapters or books on an
even-numbered page.

  If you don't like the default headers that `@setchapternewpage' sets,
you can explicit control them with the `@headings' command.  *Note The
`@headings' Command: headings on off.

  At the beginning of a manual or book, pages are not numbered--for
example, the title and copyright pages of a book are not numbered.  By
convention, table of contents and frontmatter pages are numbered with
roman numerals and not in sequence with the rest of the document.

  Since an Info file does not have pages, the `@setchapternewpage'
command has no effect on it.

  We recommend not including any `@setchapternewpage' command in your
manual sources at all, since the desired output is not intrinsic to the
document.  For a particular hard copy run, if you don't want the
default option (no blank pages, same headers on all pages) use the
`--texinfo' option to `texi2dvi' to specify the output you want.


File: texinfo,  Node: paragraphindent,  Next: exampleindent,  Prev: setchapternewpage,  Up: Global Document Commands

Paragraph Indenting
-------------------

  The Texinfo processors may insert whitespace at the beginning of the
first line of each paragraph, thereby indenting that paragraph.  You can
use the `@paragraphindent' command to specify this indentation.  Write
an `@paragraphindent' command at the beginning of a line followed by
either `asis' or a number:

     @paragraphindent INDENT

  The indentation is according to the value of INDENT:

`asis'
     Do not change the existing indentation (not implemented in TeX).

`none'
0
     Omit all indentation.

N
     Indent by N space characters in Info output, by N ems in TeX.

  The default value of INDENT is 3.  `@paragraphindent' is ignored for
HTML output.

  It is best to write the `@paragraphindent' command before the
end-of-header line at the beginning of a Texinfo file, so the region
formatting commands indent paragraphs as specified.  *Note Start of
Header::.

  A peculiarity of the `texinfo-format-buffer' and
`texinfo-format-region' commands is that they do not indent (nor fill)
paragraphs that contain `@w' or `@*' commands.  *Note Refilling
Paragraphs::, for further information.


File: texinfo,  Node: exampleindent,  Prev: paragraphindent,  Up: Global Document Commands

`@exampleindent': Environment Indenting
---------------------------------------

  The Texinfo processors indent each line of `@example' and similar
environments.  You can use the `@exampleindent' command to specify this
indentation.  Write an `@exampleindent' command at the beginning of a
line followed by either `asis' or a number:

     @exampleindent INDENT

  The indentation is according to the value of INDENT:

`asis'
     Do not change the existing indentation (not implemented in TeX).

0
     Omit all indentation.

N
     Indent environments by N space characters in Info output, by N ems
     in TeX.

  The default value of INDENT is 5.  `@exampleindent' is ignored for
HTML output.

  It is best to write the `@exampleindent' command before the
end-of-header line at the beginning of a Texinfo file, so the region
formatting commands indent paragraphs as specified.  *Note Start of
Header::.


File: texinfo,  Node: Software Copying Permissions,  Prev: Global Document Commands,  Up: Beginning a File

Software Copying Permissions
============================

  If the Texinfo file has a section containing the "General Public
License" and the distribution information and a warranty disclaimer for
the software that is documented, we recommend placing this right after
the `Top' node.  The General Public License is very important to Project
GNU software.  It ensures that you and others will continue to have a
right to use and share the software.

  The copying and distribution information and the disclaimer are
followed by an introduction or else by the first chapter of the manual.

  Although an introduction is not a required part of a Texinfo file, it
is very helpful.  Ideally, it should state clearly and concisely what
the file is about and who would be interested in reading it.  In
general, an introduction would follow the licensing and distribution
information, although sometimes people put it earlier in the document.


File: texinfo,  Node: Ending a File,  Next: Structuring,  Prev: Beginning a File,  Up: Top

Ending a Texinfo File
*********************

  The end of a Texinfo file should include commands to create indices
and (perhaps) to generate both the full and summary tables of contents.
Finally, it must include the `@bye' command that marks the last line to
be processed.

  For example:

     @node Index
     @unnumbered Index
     
     @printindex cp
     
     @shortcontents
     @contents
     
     @bye

* Menu:

* Printing Indices & Menus::    How to print an index in hardcopy and
                                  generate index menus in Info.
* Contents::                    How to create a table of contents.
* File End::                    How to mark the end of a file.


File: texinfo,  Node: Printing Indices & Menus,  Next: Contents,  Up: Ending a File

Printing Indices and Menus
==========================

  To print an index means to include it as part of a manual or Info
file.  This does not happen automatically just because you use `@cindex'
or other index-entry generating commands in the Texinfo file; those just
cause the raw data for the index to be accumulated.  To generate an
index, you must include the `@printindex' command at the place in the
document where you want the index to appear.  Also, as part of the
process of creating a printed manual, you must run a program called
`texindex' (*note Hardcopy::) to sort the raw data to produce a sorted
index file.  The sorted index file is what is actually used to print
the index.

  Texinfo offers six separate types of predefined index, each with a
two-letter abbreviation, as illustrated in the following table.
However, you may merge indices (*note Combining Indices::) or define
your own indices (*note New Indices::).

  Here are the predefined indices, their abbreviations, and the
corresponding index entry commands:

`cp'
     concept index (`@cindex')

`fn'
     function index (`@findex')

`vr'
     variable index (`@index')

`ky'
     key index (`@kindex')

`pg'
     program index (`@pindex')

`tp'
     data type index (`@tindex')

  The `@printindex' command takes a two-letter index abbreviation,
reads the corresponding sorted index file and formats it appropriately
into an index.

  The `@printindex' command does not generate a chapter heading for the
index.  Consequently, you should precede the `@printindex' command with
a suitable section or chapter command (usually `@appendix' or
`@unnumbered') to supply the chapter heading and put the index into the
table of contents.  Precede the `@unnumbered' command with an `@node'
line.

  For example:

     @node Variable Index
     @unnumbered Variable Index
     
     @printindex vr
     
     @node Concept Index
     @unnumbered Concept Index
     
     @printindex cp

We recommend placing the concept index last, since that makes it easiest
to find.  We also recommend having a single index whenever possible,
since then readers have only one place to look (*note Combining
Indices::).


File: texinfo,  Node: Contents,  Next: File End,  Prev: Printing Indices & Menus,  Up: Ending a File

Generating a Table of Contents
==============================

  The `@chapter', `@section', and other structuring commands supply the
information to make up a table of contents, but they do not cause an
actual table to appear in the manual.  To do this, you must use the
`@contents' and/or `@summarycontents' command(s).

`@contents'
     Generate a table of contents in a printed manual, including all
     chapters, sections, subsections, etc., as well as appendices and
     unnumbered chapters.  Headings generated by the `@heading' series
     of commands do not appear in the table of contents.

`@shortcontents'
`@summarycontents'
     (`@summarycontents' is a synonym for `@shortcontents'.)

     Generate a short or summary table of contents that lists only the
     chapters, appendices, and unnumbered chapters.  Sections,
     subsections and subsubsections are omitted.  Only a long manual
     needs a short table of contents in addition to the full table of
     contents.

  Both contents commands should be written on a line by themselves.
The contents commands automatically generate a chapter-like heading at
the top of the first table of contents page, so don't include any
sectioning command such as `@unnumbered' before them.

  Since an Info file uses menus instead of tables of contents, the Info
formatting commands ignore the contents commands.  But the contents are
included in plain text output (generated by `makeinfo --no-headers'),
unless `makeinfo' is writing its output to standard output.

  When `makeinfo' writes a short table of contents while producing html
output, the links in the short table of contents point to corresponding
entries in the full table of contents rather than the text of the
document. The links in the full table of contents point to the main
text of the document.

  The contents commands can be placed either at the very end of the
file, after any indices (see the previous section) and just before the
`@bye' (see the next section), or near the beginning of the file, after
the `@end titlepage' (*note titlepage::).  The advantage to the former
is that then the contents output is always up to date, because it
reflects the processing just done.  The advantage to the latter is that
the contents are printed in the proper place, thus you do not need to
rearrange the DVI file with `dviselect' or shuffle paper.

  As an author, you can put the contents commands wherever you prefer.
But if you are a user simply printing a manual, you may wish to print
the contents after the title page even if the author put the contents
commands at the end of the document (as is the case in most existing
Texinfo documents, at this writing).  You can do this by specifying
`@setcontentsaftertitlepage' and/or `@setshortcontentsaftertitlepage'.
The first prints only the main contents after the `@end titlepage'; the
second prints both the short contents and the main contents.  In either
case, any subsequent `@contents' or `@shortcontents' is ignored (unless
no `@end titlepage' is ever encountered).

  You need to include the `@set...contentsaftertitlepage' commands
early in the document (just after `@setfilename', for example).  We
recommend using `texi2dvi' (*note Format with texi2dvi::) to specify
this without altering the source file at all.  For example:
     texi2dvi --texinfo=@setcontentsaftertitlepage foo.texi


File: texinfo,  Node: File End,  Prev: Contents,  Up: Ending a File

`@bye' File Ending
==================

  An `@bye' command terminates TeX or Info formatting.  None of the
formatting commands reading anything following `@bye'.  The `@bye'
command should be on a line by itself.

  If you wish, you may follow the `@bye' line with notes. These notes
will not be formatted and will not appear in either Info or a printed
manual; it is as if text after `@bye' were within `@ignore' ... `@end
ignore'.  Also, you may follow the `@bye' line with a local variables
list for Emacs.  *Note Using Local Variables and the Compile Command:
Compile-Command, for more information.


File: texinfo,  Node: Structuring,  Next: Nodes,  Prev: Ending a File,  Up: Top

Chapter Structuring
*******************

  The "chapter structuring" commands divide a document into a hierarchy
of chapters, sections, subsections, and subsubsections.  These commands
generate large headings; they also provide information for the table of
contents of a printed manual (*note Generating a Table of Contents:
Contents.).

  The chapter structuring commands do not create an Info node structure,
so normally you should put an `@node' command immediately before each
chapter structuring command (*note Nodes::).  The only time you are
likely to use the chapter structuring commands without using the node
structuring commands is if you are writing a document that contains no
cross references and will never be transformed into Info format.

  It is unlikely that you will ever write a Texinfo file that is
intended only as an Info file and not as a printable document.  If you
do, you might still use chapter structuring commands to create a
heading at the top of each node--but you don't need to.

* Menu:

* Tree Structuring::            A manual is like an upside down tree ...
* Structuring Command Types::   How to divide a manual into parts.
* makeinfo top::                The `@top' command, part of the `Top' node.
* chapter::
* unnumbered & appendix::
* majorheading & chapheading::
* section::
* unnumberedsec appendixsec heading::
* subsection::
* unnumberedsubsec appendixsubsec subheading::
* subsubsection::               Commands for the lowest level sections.
* Raise/lower sections::        How to change commands' hierarchical level.


File: texinfo,  Node: Tree Structuring,  Next: Structuring Command Types,  Up: Structuring

Tree Structure of Sections
==========================

  A Texinfo file is usually structured like a book with chapters,
sections, subsections, and the like.  This structure can be visualized
as a tree (or rather as an upside-down tree) with the root at the top
and the levels corresponding to chapters, sections, subsection, and
subsubsections.

  Here is a diagram that shows a Texinfo file with three chapters, each
of which has two sections.

                               Top
                                |
              -------------------------------------
             |                  |                  |
          Chapter 1          Chapter 2          Chapter 3
             |                  |                  |
          --------           --------           --------
         |        |         |        |         |        |
      Section  Section   Section  Section   Section  Section
        1.1      1.2       2.1      2.2       3.1      3.2

  In a Texinfo file that has this structure, the beginning of Chapter 2
looks like this:

     @node    Chapter 2,  Chapter 3, Chapter 1, top
     @chapter Chapter 2

  The chapter structuring commands are described in the sections that
follow; the `@node' and `@menu' commands are described in following
chapters. (*Note Nodes::, and see *Note Menus::.)


File: texinfo,  Node: Structuring Command Types,  Next: makeinfo top,  Prev: Tree Structuring,  Up: Structuring

Structuring Command Types
=========================

  The chapter structuring commands fall into four groups or series, each
of which contains structuring commands corresponding to the
hierarchical levels of chapters, sections, subsections, and
subsubsections.

  The four groups are the `@chapter' series, the `@unnumbered' series,
the `@appendix' series, and the `@heading' series.

  Each command produces titles that have a different appearance on the
printed page or Info file; only some of the commands produce titles
that are listed in the table of contents of a printed book or manual.

   * The `@chapter' and `@appendix' series of commands produce numbered
     or lettered entries both in the body of a printed work and in its
     table of contents.

   * The `@unnumbered' series of commands produce unnumbered entries
     both in the body of a printed work and in its table of contents.
     The `@top' command, which has a special use, is a member of this
     series (*note `@top': makeinfo top.).

   * The `@heading' series of commands produce unnumbered headings that
     do not appear in a table of contents.  The heading commands never
     start a new page.

   * The `@majorheading' command produces results similar to using the
     `@chapheading' command but generates a larger vertical whitespace
     before the heading.

   * When an `@setchapternewpage' command says to do so, the
     `@chapter', `@unnumbered', and `@appendix' commands start new
     pages in the printed manual; the `@heading' commands do not.

  Here are the four groups of chapter structuring commands:

                                                            No new page
Numbered       Unnumbered             Lettered/numbered     Unnumbered
In contents    In contents            In contents           Omitted from
                                                            contents
               `@top'                                       `@majorheading'
`@chapter'     `@unnumbered'          `@appendix'           `@chapheading'
`@section'     `@unnumberedsec'       `@appendixsec'        `@heading'
`@subsection'  `@unnumberedsubsec'    `@appendixsubsec'     `@subheading'
`@subsubsection'`@unnumberedsubsubsec' `@appendixsubsubsec'  `@subsubheading'


File: texinfo,  Node: makeinfo top,  Next: chapter,  Prev: Structuring Command Types,  Up: Structuring

`@top'
======

  The `@top' command is a special sectioning command that you use only
after an `@node Top' line at the beginning of a Texinfo file.  The
`@top' command tells the `makeinfo' formatter which node is the `Top'
node, so it can use it as the root of the node tree if your manual uses
implicit pointers.  It has the same typesetting effect as `@unnumbered'
(*note `@unnumbered' and `@appendix': unnumbered & appendix.).  For
detailed information, see *Note The `@top' Command: makeinfo top
command.

  The `@top' node and its menu (if any) is conventionally wrapped in an
`@ifnottex' conditional so that it will appear only in Info and HTML
output, not TeX.


File: texinfo,  Node: chapter,  Next: unnumbered & appendix,  Prev: makeinfo top,  Up: Structuring

`@chapter'
==========

  `@chapter' identifies a chapter in the document.  Write the command
at the beginning of a line and follow it on the same line by the title
of the chapter.

  For example, this chapter in this manual is entitled "Chapter
Structuring"; the `@chapter' line looks like this:

     @chapter Chapter Structuring

  In TeX, the `@chapter' command creates a chapter in the document,
specifying the chapter title.  The chapter is numbered automatically.

  In Info, the `@chapter' command causes the title to appear on a line
by itself, with a line of asterisks inserted underneath.  Thus, in
Info, the above example produces the following output:

     Chapter Structuring
     *******************

  Texinfo also provides a command `@centerchap', which is analogous to
`@unnumbered', but centers its argument in the printed output.  This
kind of stylistic choice is not usually offered by Texinfo.


File: texinfo,  Node: unnumbered & appendix,  Next: majorheading & chapheading,  Prev: chapter,  Up: Structuring

`@unnumbered' and `@appendix'
=============================

  Use the `@unnumbered' command to create a chapter that appears in a
printed manual without chapter numbers of any kind.  Use the
`@appendix' command to create an appendix in a printed manual that is
labelled by letter instead of by number.

  For Info file output, the `@unnumbered' and `@appendix' commands are
equivalent to `@chapter': the title is printed on a line by itself with
a line of asterisks underneath.  (*Note `@chapter': chapter.)

  To create an appendix or an unnumbered chapter, write an `@appendix'
or `@unnumbered' command at the beginning of a line and follow it on
the same line by the title, as you would if you were creating a chapter.

